---
title: Stop labeling yourself a junior developer
date: 2021-10-22
layout: post
permalink: /junior-developer-label
tags:
    - career
---

I was defeated before I even started interviewing. I gave myself a junior software developer title. The defeat was self-imposed.

You’ll seldom see job postings for a _junior software developer_ position. You have to look at it from the company's perspective — they want the most experienced software developer preferably without providing the most _experienced pay_.

When breaking into this industry, I was intimidated by job postings. Senior this, senior that. You've seen job postings that require you to know SQL, C++, C#, Java, Rails, Node, Javascript, CSS, AWS, Kubernetes, Docker, and more.

Experienced developers know that this is a wish list but newer folks are intimidated by it.

When I called myself a junior software developer, I couldn't help but feel as if the interviewer is doing me a favor and I had nothing to offer. In every interview, I felt like the last kid that's picked for the volleyball team. I was scrap metal.

The first few interviews went okay but I still felt inferior to positions I was applying to. I sounded meek. It's as if I was saying "Pretty please sir --- take me and I'll work hard for you". No one wants desperate.

I woke up one night at 3 am with a persistent thought in my head --- stop selling yourself short. You're a software developer, period.

I realized how I limited myself with the label _junior software developer_. This wasn't my first professional job search and I've already worked in the software industry for 8 years. There were management skills and social skills I had that other software developers didn't.

I built a portfolio with two projects using Ruby on Rails. As I learned how to program --- I wrote technical blog posts. I was doing things most _junior developers_ didn't do. Why would I force myself into that label?

I got up that night at 3 am and sat down to eradicate the words _junior_ out of my resume and LinkedIn.

I was a _software developer_. We're all learning. If you can put together code, get it working, and deploy it --- you're a software developer.

If you can google / Stack Overflow your coding problems and quickly find solutions --- you already do what experienced software developers do on a weekly basis.

That night changed my interviewing routine. By calling myself a software developer and _believing_ that the person interviewing me wasn't God, I was able to have a legitimate value for value conversation with interviewers that didn't sound desperate.

It was no longer "please hire me" but rather "What kind of problems do you have / here's what I can offer to your team / what are you looking for in the candidate for this position".

It turned into a value for value exchange. That's where you want to be as someone that's jumping into this industry or if you're interviewing for a new software job.

But you might say that you don't have that kind of confidence.

You can make it. Build a project or two for your portfolio and document how you did that.

Start a blog as you're learning about software development. As you're learning new ideas, teach them in your blog posts. If you feel the imposter syndrome, [it can be overcome by producing work](/overcome-imposter-syndrome). If you feel you have nothing original to contribute then [you're overvaluing originality](/originality-paralyzes-creativity).

The more you create as you learn, the most it will subconsciously convince you that you're more than just a _junior developer_. Professionals create.

It'll be most competitive when you're trying to break into the software industry as a novice. You don't have to be the best to stand above your competition. Just strive to be [in the top 20%](/top-twenty-percent) to find that first company to work for.

Your first job will be the hardest to find. Once you get real work experience and continue to market yourself through your blog / LinkedIn, recruiters will be hunting for you.
